# Unary Conjunctive Grammar Parser
This project is a part of a Bachelor's degree thesis.

## Compilation

To compile the project, you need a C++ compiler and the GMP library installed. On Debian/Ubuntu-based systems, you can install GMP with the following command:

```bash
sudo apt install libgmp-dev
```

Then, compile the project using `make`

```bash
make
```

Two executable files should appear in the main folder: `normaliser` and `solver`.

## Usage

### `normaliser`

The `normaliser` program converts a given grammar into its Binary Normal Form. The most convenient way to use it is to run it with two arguments: the input filename and the output filename.

```bash
./normaliser examples/unary examples/unary_normal
```

- If one argument is provided, it must be the input file name. The output is then printed to stdout.
- If no arguments are provided, the program reads the input from stdin and prints the output to stdout.

### `solver`
The `solver program` reads a grammar and an integer n, then determines whether the string $a^n$ belongs to the language generated by the grammar. The most convenient way to use it is with two arguments: the input filename and the integer n.

```bash
./solver examples/unary 4096
```

- If one argument is provided, it must be the name of the file with the grammar. Integer n is read from the stdin.
- If no arguments are provided, both grammar and integer n are read from stdin. Integer n must be provided before the grammar definition. 

## Examples
Examples of conjunctive grammars can be found in the `examples` folder. Some of those are referenced in the thesis paper.

### `unary_irregular`

Referenced as Example 2.3 in the thesis. This grammar was constructed by A. Jeż to demonstrate that conjunctive grammars over a one-letter alphabet can generate non-regular languages.

* **Paper:** "Conjunctive grammars generate non-regular unary languages" ([Link to Publisher](https://www.worldscientific.com/doi/abs/10.1142/S012905410800584X))
* **Slides:** [Presentation at DLT](https://ii.uni.wroc.pl/~aje/presentation/PresentationDLT.pdf)

### `unary_irregular_with_epsilon`

The same grammar as above, enriched with an empty string production.

### `expanding`

Referenced as Example 6.1 in the thesis. This serves as a demonstration of how the normalization process can increase the size of the grammar exponentially.

### `tbox_grammar`

This is an example of a grammar derived from a TBox. The original TBox appears as Example 1 in the article ["Analysing Temporal Reasoning in Description Logics Using Formal Grammars"](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00575) by C. Bourgaux
, A. Gnatenko and M. Thomazo. The tool used to transform the TBox into this grammar was kindly provided by the authors of the article.

### `not_unary_1` & `not_unary_2`

Those grammars originate from an article by A. Okhotin ["Conjuntive Grammars"](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220520582_Conjunctive_Grammars). They can be found there as Example 1 and Example 2.
Both grammars have alphabet sizes greater than one, therefore they cannot be parsed by the `solver` program. However, `normaliser` can still transform them into their normal forms.

